README.md, before:

# ⚡ Netlify Plugin: Custom Cache [![npm](https://img.shields.io/npm/v/netlify-plugin-cache?logo=npm&color=red)](https://www.npmjs.com/package/netlify-plugin-cache) ![CI](https://github.com/jakejarvis/netlify-plugin-cache/workflows/CI/badge.svg)

A generic cache plugin for saving and restoring files and/or folders between Netlify builds for impressive speed improvements. Worry less about running out of build minutes! ⏰

Essentially, this plugin is a pretty wrapper around [Netlify's native cache utility](https://github.com/netlify/build/blob/master/packages/cache-utils/README.md) — it isn't tied to any specific static site generator (on purpose).

## 💿 Install

Add the following lines to your `netlify.toml`:

```toml
[[plugins]]
package = "netlify-plugin-cache"
  [plugins.inputs]
  # Optional (but highly recommended). Defaults to [".cache"].
  paths = ["resources", "_vendor", "folder/file.md"]
```

This plugin only takes one input named `paths`: an array of files and/or directories relative to your project's root. These files/directories are restored before a build and saved in cache after a build **if it is successful**.

**🚨 Important:** `paths` defaults to `[".cache"]`, but it's **highly recommended** you set this yourself based on the tool(s) you're using to generate your site. See examples below.

Read more about plugin configuration at [the official Netlify Plugin docs](https://docs.netlify.com/configure-builds/build-plugins/#install-a-plugin).

## 👩‍💻 Usage

- **Hugo:** Caching the `resources` directory can speed up your build greatly if you [process](https://gohugo.io/content-management/image-processing/) a lot of images, or compile SASS/SCSS via Hugo pipes. You can also cache the `public` directory to avoid completely rebuilding the entire site on each deploy. [More info here.](https://gohugo.io/getting-started/directory-structure/#directory-structure-explained)
- **Gatsby:** By default, the `.cache` directory holds persistent data between builds. You can also cache the `dist` directory to avoid completely rebuilding the entire site on each deploy. [More info here.](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/docs/build-caching/)
- **Jekyll:** A caching API was added as of v4. The notoriously slow SSG can become (relatively) faster by caching the `.jekyll-cache` directory. [More info here.](https://jekyllrb.com/tutorials/cache-api/)
- **Next.js:** The `.next` directory holds the build output. [More info here.](https://nextjs.org/docs/api-reference/next.config.js/setting-a-custom-build-directory)
- **Anything else:** This is the reason I kept this plugin as generic as possible! Research the caching behavior of your static site generator (and how to customize it if necessary). Feel free to open a PR and list it here as well!

## 🐛 Debugging

This plugin doesn't provide a way to output a list of files that were cached or restored, because Netlify already provides an official plugin named [`netlify-plugin-debug-cache`](https://github.com/netlify-labs/netlify-plugin-debug-cache) to do exactly that. No need to re-invent the wheel!

You can add the debug plugin **after** this plugin in your `netlify.toml`. (And yes, you need a `[[plugins]]` line for _each_ plugin you add.)

```toml
[[plugins]]
package = "netlify-plugin-debug-cache"
```

The debug plugin will generate a file named `cache-output.json` at the root of your project's publish directory. [See an example file](https://infallible-wing-581e78.netlify.app/cache-output.json) or [learn more about this plugin](https://github.com/netlify-labs/netlify-plugin-debug-cache).

## 📜 License

This project is distributed under the [MIT license](LICENSE).

Commit message:

Add reference to netlify run-build-functions

README.md, after:

# ⚡ Netlify Plugin: Custom Cache [![npm](https://img.shields.io/npm/v/netlify-plugin-cache?logo=npm&color=red)](https://www.npmjs.com/package/netlify-plugin-cache) ![CI](https://github.com/jakejarvis/netlify-plugin-cache/workflows/CI/badge.svg)

A generic cache plugin for saving and restoring files and/or folders between Netlify builds for impressive speed improvements. Worry less about running out of build minutes! ⏰

Essentially, this plugin is a pretty wrapper around [Netlify's native cache utility](https://github.com/netlify/build/blob/master/packages/cache-utils/README.md) — it isn't tied to any specific static site generator (on purpose).

## 💿 Install

Add the following lines to your `netlify.toml`:

```toml
[[plugins]]
package = "netlify-plugin-cache"
  [plugins.inputs]
  # Optional (but highly recommended). Defaults to [".cache"].
  paths = ["resources", "_vendor", "folder/file.md"]
```

This plugin only takes one input named `paths`: an array of files and/or directories relative to your project's root. These files/directories are restored before a build and saved in cache after a build **if it is successful**.

**🚨 Important:** `paths` defaults to `[".cache"]`, but it's **highly recommended** you set this yourself based on the tool(s) you're using to generate your site. See examples below.

Read more about plugin configuration at [the official Netlify Plugin docs](https://docs.netlify.com/configure-builds/build-plugins/#install-a-plugin).

## 👩‍💻 Usage

- **Hugo:** Caching the `resources` directory can speed up your build greatly if you [process](https://gohugo.io/content-management/image-processing/) a lot of images, or compile SASS/SCSS via Hugo pipes. You can also cache the `public` directory to avoid completely rebuilding the entire site on each deploy. [More info here.](https://gohugo.io/getting-started/directory-structure/#directory-structure-explained)
- **Gatsby:** By default, the `.cache` directory holds persistent data between builds. You can also cache the `dist` directory to avoid completely rebuilding the entire site on each deploy. [More info here.](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/docs/build-caching/)
- **Jekyll:** A caching API was added as of v4. The notoriously slow SSG can become (relatively) faster by caching the `.jekyll-cache` directory. [More info here.](https://jekyllrb.com/tutorials/cache-api/)
- **Next.js:** The `.next` directory holds the build output. [More info here.](https://nextjs.org/docs/api-reference/next.config.js/setting-a-custom-build-directory)
- **Anything else:** This is the reason I kept this plugin as generic as possible! Research the caching behavior of your static site generator (and how to customize it if necessary). Check if the cache directory is already cached by netlify in their [run-build-function.sh](https://github.com/netlify/build-image/blob/focal/run-build-functions.sh). Feel free to open a PR and list it here as well!

## 🐛 Debugging

This plugin doesn't provide a way to output a list of files that were cached or restored, because Netlify already provides an official plugin named [`netlify-plugin-debug-cache`](https://github.com/netlify-labs/netlify-plugin-debug-cache) to do exactly that. No need to re-invent the wheel!

You can add the debug plugin **after** this plugin in your `netlify.toml`. (And yes, you need a `[[plugins]]` line for _each_ plugin you add.)

```toml
[[plugins]]
package = "netlify-plugin-debug-cache"
```

The debug plugin will generate a file named `cache-output.json` at the root of your project's publish directory. [See an example file](https://infallible-wing-581e78.netlify.app/cache-output.json) or [learn more about this plugin](https://github.com/netlify-labs/netlify-plugin-debug-cache).

## 📜 License

This project is distributed under the [MIT license](LICENSE).
